Add "selecting a quantization method" doc (#37159)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/quantization/selecting.md

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

# Selecting a quantization method

There are many quantization methods available in Transformers for inference and fine-tuning. This guide helps you choose the most common and production-ready quantization techniques depending on your use case, and presents the advantages and disadvantages of each technique.

For a comprehensive overview of all supported methods and their features, refer back to the table in the [Overview](./overview).

## Inference

Consider the quantization methods below for inference.

| quantization method | use case |
|---|---|
| bitsandbytes | ease of use and QLoRA fine-tuning on NVIDIA GPUs |
| compressed-tensors | loading specific quantized formats (FP8, Sparse) |
| GPTQModel or AWQ | good 4-bit accuracy with upfront calibration |
| HQQ | fast on the fly quantization without calibration |
| torchao | flexibility and fast inference with torch.compile |

> ### [bitsandbytes](./bitsandbytes.md)

Reviewer: You can leave these headers just like this :)

```suggestion
### bitsandbytes
```

| Pros                                                         | Cons                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Very simple, no calibration dataset required for inference.  | Primarily optimized for NVIDIA GPUs (CUDA).             |
| Good community support and widely adopted.                   | Inference speedup isn't guaranteed.                     |

> ### [GPTQ / GPTQModel](./gptq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GPTQ/GPTQModel
```

| Pros                                                                 | Cons                                                                 |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Often achieves high accuracy.                                        | Requires a calibration dataset and a separate calibration step.      |
| Can lead to inference speedups.                                      | Possible to overfit on calibration data.                             |
| Many pre-quantized GPTQ models on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?other=gptq). |                                           |

> ### [AWQ (Activation-aware Weight Quantization)](./awq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWQ (Activation-aware Weight Quantization)
```

| Pros                                                                 | Cons                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| Often achieves high accuracy at 4-bit. (Sometimes surpasses GPTQ on specific tasks.) | Requires calibration if quantizing yourself.        |
| Can lead to inference speedups.                                      |                                                     |
| Shorter calibration time than GPTQ.                                  |                                                     |
| Many pre-quantized AWQ models on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?other=awq). |                                                     |

> ### [torchao](./torchao)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### torchao
```

| Pros                                                                 | Cons                                                                 |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strong integration with `torch.compile` for potential speedups.     | Newer library, ecosystem still evolving.                             |
| Offers decent CPU quantization support.                              | Performance depends on `torch.compile` working well.                 |
| Flexibility in quantization schemes (int8, int4, fp8).           | 4-bit quantization may not match GPTQ/AWQ in accuracy.              |

> ### [HQQ (Half-Quadratic Quantization)](./hqq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HQQ (Half-Quadratic Quantization)
```

| Pros                                                                 | Cons                                                                       |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Fast quantization process, no calibration data needed.              | Accuracy can degrade significantly at bit depths <4-bit.                     |
| Multiple backends for fast inference.                                | Inference speed may not match others unless using `torch.compile` or backends. |
| Compatible with `torch.compile`.                                     |                                                                            |
| Supports wide range of bit depths (8, 4, 3, 2, 1-bit).              |                                                                            |

> ### [compressed-tensors](./compressed_tensors)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### compressed-tensors
```

<!--Copyright 2024 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

# Selecting a Quantization Method

This guide helps you navigate the most common and production-ready quantization techniques available in Transformers and associated libraries. For a comprehensive overview of all supported methods and their features, refer back to the [Quantization Overview](./overview) table.

## TLDR

*   For ease of use and QLoRA fine-tuning on NVIDIA GPUs: **bitsandbytes**

> *   For good 4-bit accuracy with upfront calibration: **GPTQModel** or **AWQ**

Reviewer 2: compressed-tensors also offer nice quantized models

> *   For good 4-bit accuracy with upfront calibration: **GPTQModel** or **AWQ**

Reviewer: Let me see if I can find it!

| Supports wide range of bit depths (8, 4, 3, 2, 1-bit).              |                                                                            |

See the [HQQ documentation](./hqq) for more details.

#### torchao

| Pros                                                                 | Cons                                                                 |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strong integration with `torch.compile` for potential speedups.     | Newer library, ecosystem still evolving.                             |
| Offers decent CPU quantization support.                              | Performance depends on `torch.compile` working well.                 |
| Flexibility in quantization schemes (int8, int4, fp8).           | 4-bit quantization (int4wo) may not match GPTQ/AWQ in accuracy.              |

See the [torchao documentation](./torchao) for more details.

### Calibration-based Quantization

These methods require an upfront calibration step using a dataset to potentially achieve higher accuracy.

#### GPTQ/GPTQModel

> 

Reviewer: You can include the estimation time in a sentence here after the section header and before the table!

<!--Copyright 2024 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

> # Selecting a Quantization Method
> 
> This guide helps you navigate the most common and production-ready quantization techniques available in Transformers and associated libraries. For a comprehensive overview of all supported methods and their features, refer back to the [Quantization Overview](./overview) table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Selecting a quantization method

There are many quantization methods available in Transformers for inference and fine-tuning. This guide helps you choose the most common and production-ready quantization techniques depending on your use case, and presents the advantages and disadvantages of each technique.

For a comprehensive overview of all supported methods and their features, refer back to the table in the [Overview](./overview).
```

> ## Inference

Reviewer: I think it'd be easier to present the info in a table, and it'd be nice to clarify what exactly is meant by "nice quantized models" :)

```suggestion
## Inference

Consider the quantization methods below for inference.

| quantization method | use case |
|---|---|
| bitsandbytes | ease of use and QLoRA fine-tuning on NVIDIA GPUs |
| compressed-tensors | loading specific quantized formats (FP8, Sparse) |
| GPTQModel or AWQ | good 4-bit accuracy with upfront calibration |
| HQQ | fast on the fly quantization without calibration |
| torchao | flexibility and fast inference with torch.compile |
```

**TLDR (Inference):**

*   For ease of use and QLoRA fine-tuning on NVIDIA GPUs: **bitsandbytes**
*   For good 4-bit accuracy with upfront calibration: **GPTQModel** or **AWQ**
*   For speed via `torch.compile` and flexibility: **torchao**
*   For fast on-the-fly quantization without calibration: **HQQ** is worth considering.
*   For loading specific formats (FP8, Sparse) and nice quantized models: **compressed-tensors** 

> ## Production-Ready & Widely Used Inference Methods:
> These methods are generally well-tested, widely adopted, and suitable for many production scenarios.
> 
> ### 1. bitsandbytes (`load_in_8bit` / `load_in_4bit`)

Reviewer: I think it'd also be easier here to compare and read if the info was presented in a table!

```suggestion
### bitsandbytes
```

Author: I'm not sure what the best way to this is. Maybe like this?
| Method                                   | Calibration Needed?    | Speed Focus                             | Hardware Focus                 | Notes / Considerations                                                                 |
|------------------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [bitsandbytes](./bitsandbytes)           | No                     | Speedup not guaranteed                  | NVIDIA GPUs (primarily)        | Standard for QLoRA (see Fine-tuning). Multi-backend work ongoing.                      |
| [GPTQ](./gptq) / GPTQModel               | Yes                    | Optimized Kernels (ExLlama/Marlin)      | Broader (GPTQModel)            | Many pre-quantized models on [Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?other=gptq).          |
| [AWQ](./awq)                             | Yes                    | Optimized Kernels / Fused Modules       | Kernels: NVIDIA                | Many pre-quantized models on [Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?other=awq)            |
| [torchao](./torchao)                     | No                     | Speeds up from  `torch.compile`         | Broad                          | Newer library. int4wo in torchao might not reach the same accuracy as GPTQ/AWQ’s 4-bit |
| [HQQ](./hqq)                             | No                     | Needs backends or `torch.compile`       | Broad                          | Accuracy at very low bit depths (<4-bit) can degrade                                   |
| [compressed-tensors](./compressed_tensors)| N/A (Not quantizing)  | Depends on saved format/impl.           | Broad                          | Primarily for loading models quantized elsewhere, not quantizing within Transformers.  |

*   **Description:** A fast, on-the-fly quantization method (like bitsandbytes) that doesn't require calibration data.
*   **Pros:**
    *   Fast quantization process and no calibration data required.
    *   Multiple backends for fast inference.
    *   Compatible with `torch.compile` for potential inference speedups.
    *   It supports a wide range of bit depths (8, 4, 3, 2, 1-bit)
*   **Cons:**
    *   Accuracy at very low bit depths (<4-bit) can degrade significantly and requires careful evaluation for the specific task.
    *   While quantization is fast, inference speed might not be faster than other methods unless using specific backends or `torch.compile`.
See the [HQQ documentation](./hqq) for more details.

### 6. compressed-tensors

*   **Description:** Allows loading models saved in specific compressed formats (like FP8, INT8/4, potentially with sparsity).
*   **Pros:** 
    *   Supports flexible formats including FP8 and sparsity.
*   **Cons:** 
    *   Primarily for loading pre-quantized models, not performing the quantization within Transformers itself.

See the [compressed-tensors documentation](./compressed_tensors) for more details.

> ## Fine-Tuning
> 
> Quantization can also be used during fine-tuning to save memory, most commonly with PEFT's QLoRA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Fine-tuning

Consider the quantization method below during fine-tuning to save memory.
```

> ### bitsandbytes (4-bit NF4 for QLoRA)

Reviewer: Format for identical section headers

```suggestion
### bitsandbytes[[training]]
```

*   **Description:** The standard method for QLoRA fine-tuning via PEFT.
*   **Pros:** Enables fine-tuning large models on consumer GPUs; widely supported and documented for PEFT.
*   **Cons:** Primarily for NVIDIA GPUs.

Other methods offer PEFT compatibility, though bitsandbytes is the most established and straightforward path for QLoRA.

See the [bitsandbytes documentation](./bitsandbytes#qlora) and [PEFT Docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/developer_guides/quantization#aqlm-quantization) for more details. 

> ## Advanced & Research-Oriented Methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Research
```

> Methods like [AQLM](./aqlm), [SpQR](./spqr), [VPTQ](./vptq), [HIGGS](./higgs), etc., often push the boundaries of compression (e.g., < 2-bit) or explore novel techniques.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods like [AQLM](./aqlm), [SpQR](./spqr), [VPTQ](./vptq), [HIGGS](./higgs), etc., push the boundaries of compression (< 2-bit) or explore novel techniques.
```

*   Consider these if:
    *   You need extreme compression (sub-4-bit).

>     *   You are conducting research or require state-of-the-art results shown in their respective papers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   You are conducting research or require state-of-the-art results from their respective papers.
```

    *   You have significant compute resources available for potentially complex quantization procedures.

> *   Recommendation: Consult their specific documentation and associated papers carefully before choosing them for production use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend consulting each methods documentation and associated papers carefully before choosing one for use in production.
```

> ---
> 
> Always benchmark the performance (accuracy and speed) of the quantized model on your specific task and hardware to ensure it meets your requirements. Refer to the individual documentation pages linked above for detailed usage instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> [!TIP]
> Always benchmark the performance (accuracy and speed) of the quantized model on your specific task and hardware to ensure it meets your requirements. Refer to the individual documentation pages linked above for detailed usage instructions.
```
